### Sum set

Given two finite sets of $A$ and $B$ of elements in an abelian group. We define their **sumset** to be


$$
A+B=\{a+b|a\in A,b\in B\}
$$


**Additive combinatorics** is an area of combinatorics in mathematics. A fundamental problem in this field is the *inverse sum set problem:* if $A+B$ is small, what can we say about $A$ and $B$ ? A more specific question one may raise is: if $A$ is a finite non-empty set such that $|A + A| = K|A|$ for some small number $K$, what can one say about $A$ ?

First, we would like to clarify some notations:

- Given a positive integer $k$, we define the **iterated sumset**


$$
kA = A + \cdots + A\quad (k\text{ times})
$$


This is different from dilating a set, which is denoted by 


$$
\lambda\cdot A = \{\lambda a | a\in A\}
$$


Similar to the **sumset**, we can define the **difference set**


$$
A-B= \{a-b|a\in A,b\in B\}
$$


First, how small or large can $A+A$ be given $|A|$ ? We have a trivial estimation for this:

**Proposition 1:** Let $A,B$ be two sets in the same abelian group $Z$, let $x\in Z$. Then we have the identity $|A + x| = |-A|=|A|$, the inequalities


$$
\max(|A|,|B|)\le |A-B|,|A + B|\le |A||B|
$$


and the inequalities


$$
|A|\le |A + A|\le \frac{|A|(|A| + 1)}{2}
$$


Moreover, if $A,B$ are sets of integers, we can say that


$$
|A+B|\ge |A| + |B| - 1
$$


*Proof:* For the first identity, we see that $A+x = \{a+x |a\in A\}$ is a translation of the original set $A$, thus their size must be equal. We can see why $|A+ B|\ge |A|$ based on this identity, and the upper bound of $|A+B|$ comes from counting all possible pairs of $(a,b)$ such that $a\in A,b\in B$.

The upper bound of $|A+A|$ follows from that there are in total $\binom{|A|}{2}$ numbers of unordered pairs of elements in $A$. 

Interestingly, for $A,B\subset \mathbb Z$, we can sort the elements of $A$ and $B$ in increasing order like


$$
a_1< a_2<\cdots < a_n,b_1<b_2<\cdots < b_m
$$


then


$$
a_1+b_1<a_2+b_1<\cdots < a_n + b_1 < a_n + b_2< \cdots < a_n + b_m
$$


are $n +m - 1=|A| + |B| - 1$ distinct elements in $A+B$.

We also want to quantify our measure when talking about $|A+A|$ is **not too much larger** than $|A|$. A good way to do this is defining the ratio of their size, called **doubling constant** $\sigma[A]$:


$$
\sigma[A] = \frac{|A+A|}{|A|}
$$




### Ruzsa triangle inequality

Relating to sizes of sumsets, mathematicians have developed some basic and useful inequalities.

*(Ruzsa triangle inequality)* If $A,B,C$ are finite subsets of an abelian group, then


$$
|A||B-C|\le |A-B||A-C|
$$


*Proof:* For any element $d\in B -C$, we fix a choice of $b\in B$ and $c\in C$ such that $b-c=d$ to represent it. Then we can map any element $(a,b-c)\in A\times (B-C)$ to an element $(x,y)=(a-b,a-c)\in(A-B)\times (A-C)$. This is injective, since we can get back $d$ by taking $d=y-x$ and then $a=x + b$.

**Remark:** By replacing $B$ with $-B$ or/and $C$ with $-C$, we can get other additional inequalities with similar forms:


$$
\begin{aligned}
|A||B+C|\le |A+B||A-C|\\
|A||B+C|\le |A-B||A+C|\\
|A||B-C|\le |A+B||A+C|\\
\end{aligned}
$$


It might not be clear why this is called a triangle inequality. Well, if we define the **Ruzsa distance** between two finite sets $A,B$ as


$$
d(A,B) =\log \frac{|A-B|}{\sqrt{|A||B|}}
$$


Then the theorem can be rewritten as


$$
d(A,B) + d(A,C)\le d(B,C)
$$


However, we do understand that the function $d$ is not a metric measure because $d(A,A)\ne 0$.

### Plünnecke’s inequality

If we have sets $A,B$ such that $A+B$ is not much bigger than $A$, what can we say about the bound of the size of iterated sumsets of $B$?

*(Plünnecke’s inequality)* Let $A,B$ be finite subsets of an abelian group satisfying


$$
|A+B|\le K|A|
$$


then for all non-negative integers $m,n$,


$$
|mB - nB|\le K^{m+n}|A|
$$


The following lemma bounds the expansion ratio, which is quite important in our proof.

*Lemma:* Let $X$ and $B$ be two finite sets in an abelian group with $|X| > 0$. Suppose for all $Y\subset X$,


$$
\frac{|Y+B|}{|Y|}\ge\frac{|X + B|}{|X|}
$$


Then for any nonempty finite subsets $C$ of the abelian group,


$$
\frac{|X+C+B|}{|X+C|}\le\frac{|X+ B|}{|X|}
$$


*Proof:* We can proceed by induction on the size of $C$. When $|C|=1$, $|X+C+B|=|X+B|,|X+C|=|X|$, so the statement holds. For our convenience, say $K=|X+B|/|X|$ .

For the induction step, assume that we have some $C$ such that the lemma is true. We consider the set $C'=C\cup\{c\}$ for some $c\notin C$. It suffices to prove that the ratio between the number of elements we add in $X+C'+B$ and the number of elements we add in $X+C'$ satisfies the condition. More formally,



$$
|(X+c+B)\setminus(X+C+B)|\le K|(X+c)\setminus(X+C)|
$$


Let


$$
Y=\{x\in X| x+c +B\subset x + C+ B\}
$$


be a subset of $X$. Since $|X+c+B|=|X+B|$, the size of the increment is bounded by the number of overlapping elements in set $X+c+B$ and $X+C+B$.


$$
|(X+c+B)\setminus(X+C+B)|\le |X+B|-|Y+B|
$$


Moreover, if $x\in X$ satisifes $x+c\in X+C$, then $x+c+B\subset x+C+B$ and hence $x\in Y$. So we have


$$
|(X+c)\setminus(X+C)|\ge |X| - |Y|
$$


Combining previous results, it suffices to show that


$$
|X+B|-|Y+B|\le K(|X|-|Y|)=|X+B|-K|Y|
$$


which can be rewritten as


$$
\frac{|Y+B|}{|Y|}\ge K=\frac{|X+B|}{|X|}
$$


which is clearly true based on our hypothesis.

We call $|X+B|/|X|$ the *expansion ratio* of a set $X$. Next, we can apply this lemma to prove our inequality. 

*Proof:* First, we want to choose some suitable sets so we can apply our lemma. Choose $X$ among all the non-empty subsets of $A$ with the minimum expansion ratio. Hence, the condition in the lemma is satisfied. We also have


$$
\frac{|X+B|}{|B|}\le \frac{|A+B|}{|A|}\le K
$$


apply our lemma with $C=nB$, then


$$
\frac{|X+(n+1)B|}{|X+nB|}\le \frac{|X+B|}{|B|}\le K
$$


Induction on $n$ yields


$$
|X+nB|\le K^n|X|
$$


Finally, we can apply **Ruzsa triangle inequality** for all $m,n\ge 0$:


$$
|mB -nB|\le \frac{|X+mB||X+nB|}{|X|}\le K^{m+n}|X|\le K^{m+n}|X|
$$
 
