An interesting question that mathematicians are curious about is the maximum number of edges in a n-vertex graph $G$ that forbids some other graph $H$. In other words, $G$ cannot contain $H$ as a subgraph.

### Mantel's Theorem

We may also start from the simplest question, **what is the maximum number of edges in a n-vertex graph without any triangle?** This is a foundational problem in extremal graph theory, where people study how the global properties of a graph influence local substructure.

> Hint: Try solving the case when $n=3,4,5$. Do you see any pattern?

*(Mantel's Theorem):* $K_{\lfloor n/2\rfloor,\lceil n/2\rceil}$ has the most number of edges among all triangle-free graphs. So every $n$-vertex triangle-free graph has at most $\lfloor n^2/4\rfloor$ edges.

We will give two different proofs of Mantel's theorem and each illustrates a different technique in combinatorics. The proof requires some knowledge of [Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cauchy%E2%80%93Schwarz_inequality), which states that for any two list of real numbers $a_1,a_2,\dots,a_n$ and $b_1,b_2,\dots,b_n$, we have:


$$
(a_1^2+a_2^2+\cdots+a_n^2)(b_1^2+b_2^2+\cdots+b_n^2)\ge(a_1b_1+a_2b_2+\cdots+a_nb_n)^2
$$

It has many proofs but I will not show them here since it's unrelated to our topics. Feel free to read one of my previous blog post on [Olympiad Inequalities](https://yifank.github.io/Math/Olympiad%20Inequalities/), in which I discuss more about all these inequalities.

*First Proof of Mantel's Theorem:* Let $G=(V,E)$ be a triangle-free graph with $n$ vertices and $m$ edges. For any edge $(x,y)$ in the graph, by the triangle-free condition, $x$ and $y$ don't have common neighbors, otherwise suppose $z$ is the neighbor of $x$ and $y$, $x,y,z$ will form a triangle. Thus, we have $\deg x + \deg y\le n$. Go through all the edges of $G$ and sum this up, we get:

$$
\sum_{(x,y)\in E}(\deg x + \deg y)\le \sum_{(x,y)\in E}n=mn
$$


On the other hand, for each vertex $x$, the term $\deg x$ appears for every edge $(x,y)$ in $E$ in the above inequality. Thus, in total $\deg x$ appears $\deg x$ times:



$$\sum_{(x,y)\in E}(\deg x + \deg y)=\sum_{x\in V}(\deg x)^2\le mn$$



However, by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we can also get: 



$$
n\sum_{x\in V}(\deg x) ^2 =(1+1+\cdots + 1)\sum_{x\in V}(\deg x) ^2\ge (\sum_{x\in V}\deg x)^2=(2m)^2
$$


Combine the above two inequalities,


$$
(2m)^2/n\le mn\implies m\le n^2/4
$$


as desired.

*Second Proof of Mantel's Theorem:* Let $v$ be a vertex of maximum degree in the graph $G$. For any $x,y$ in the neighborhood $N(v)$ of $v$, $x$ and $y$ are not adjacent by the triangle-free condition.

Let $A=N(v),B=V\setminus A$. All the edges in $G$ have an endpoint in $B$ (because the two vertices of the edge cannot be both in $A$). By this relation, we have the following inequality:


$$
m\le \sum_{x\in B}\deg x\le |B|\max_{x\in V}\deg x \le |B||N(v)|\le (\dfrac{|A|+|B|}{2})^2= \dfrac{n^2}{4}
$$


where the last $\le$ sign is derived by AM-GM inequality.

> Exercise: Can you prove Mantel's theorem by induction?

*Proof:* I will show the induction proof when $n$ is even, so $n=2k$. The odd case works similarly and is left to the readers.

When $k=1$, every graph with two vertices has at most $1$ edge so the claim holds.

For $k > 1$, we can pick an edge $(x,y)$ in the graph and let $G'$ denote the subgraph using the other vertices. 

- if $G'$ has more than $(k-1)^2$ edges, then $G'$ is not triangle-free by induction.

- Otherwise, for any vertex $v$ in $G'$, we cannot have $(x,v)$ and $(y,v)$ both in our graph by triangle-free condition. So the total number of edges in $G$ is at most 

	

	$$(k-1)^2+2(k-1)+1=k^2-2k+1+2k-2+1=k^2$$

	

Thus the claim holds for all even $n$.



### Turan's Theorem





